\chapter{Graphics Processing Units}\label{chapter:graphics_processing_units}

In this work, we aim to accelerate the execution of our solver using a relatively new architecture,
\acrshortpl{acr:GPU}. \Acrshortpl{acr:GPU} are massively parallel computer chips that have recently
started to be used in the scientific computing domain. \Acrshortpl{acr:GPU} were initially designed
to perform repetitive graphical computations, such as the output to a computer screen, video
processing, and synthetic image generation. These computations are \textit{embarrassingly parallel},
meaning that they are comprised of many identical computations independent of each other.
\Acrshortpl{acr:GPU} are therefore optimised for parallel efficiency. Combined with the fact that
these problems deal with huge amounts of data, \acrshortpl{acr:GPU} are also optimised for maximum
bandwidth. They are significantly different from \textit{\acrfullpl{acr:CPU}}, the traditional
architecture on which code is run. \Acrshortpl{acr:CPU} are optimised to solve serial problems as
fast as possible, meaning they prioritise serial speed over parallel efficiency, and latency over
bandwidth. 

Solving fluid flows on a mesh is a parallel problem, as at most steps it is possible to compute the
solution on the different elements making up the mesh in parallel. On the other hand, elements must
exchange information at their interfaces at each time step, meaning careful synchronisation will be
needed. Finally, the adaptive mesh refinement process detailed in
Chapter~\ref{chapter:adaptive_mesh_refinement} and the dynamic load balancing process from
Chapter~\ref{chapter:load_balancing} are not inherently parallel processes. A significant
programming task then becomes necessary to break up these algorithms into parallel tasks to be run
on \acrshortpl{acr:GPU}. Overall, if it is possible to efficiently parallelise these sequential
parts of the problem, the gains from running the main solving loop on the highly parallel
\acrshortpl{acr:GPU} should incur a significant speedup to the program.

\section{Architecture}\label{section:graphics_processing_units:architecture}

\subsection{Hardware model}\label{subsection:graphics_processing_units:architecture:hardware_model}

\Acrlongpl{acr:GPU} and \acrlongpl{acr:CPU} are fundamentally made up of the same core components.
First, data processing hardware, shown in green in Figure~\ref{fig:cpu_gpu}, consists of the parts
of the chips that do calculations on data. Control flow hardware, shown in yellow, schedules
instructions to be executed on processing hardware. In orange is the main memory of either
architecture. Main memory or \textit{\acrfull{acr:DRAM}}, shown in orange, stores data to be used
for computations. The main memory is very big, and takes a relatively long time to access. Finally,
in blue and purple are different levels of cache memory. Cache is much smaller and much faster than
main memory, and as such stores parts of the memory that the processing hardware is actively using
in order to speed up access.

\begin{figure}[H]
	\centering
	\includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{Chapter_graphics_processing_units/media/gpu-devotes-more-transistors-to-data-processing}
	\caption{\Acrshort{acr:CPU} and \acrshort{acr:GPU} architecture~\cite{Nvidia2021}: \acrshortpl{acr:GPU} dedicate more space to data processing}\label{fig:cpu_gpu}
\end{figure}

The two architectures differ as to the balance between the size and capacities of these components.
Chip area is limited by the processes used to manufacture them, so the different components must
share this limited space, and sacrifices must be made. \Acrshortpl{acr:GPU} dedicate much more space
to data processing, increasing throughput. Their compute units are also smaller, to work on more
data in parallel. \Acrshortpl{acr:CPU}, on the other hand, have fewer bigger compute units with a
higher clock speed in order to reduce latency. Their compute units are called cores. The
\acrshort{acr:GPU} compute units are called \acrshort{acr:CUDA} cores, and are arranged in rows as
\textit{\acrfullpl{acr:SM}}.

In order to reduce latency, \acrshortpl{acr:CPU} have a lot of die space dedicated to cache. More
cache helps keep data close in access time. More data is loaded from main memory at a time, assuming
that data that is near needed data will also be needed later. The deeper hierarchy of cache of
\acrshortpl{acr:CPU} helps keep the cores working on the current problem as fast as possible, never
starving for memory. \Acrshortpl{acr:GPU} have less total cache and fewer levels of cache to make
room for more \acrshort{acr:CUDA} cores. As a throughput oriented device, it is less important how
fast individual tasks complete, as long as more tasks overall are completed. The reduced cache is
acceptable because if a \acrshort{acr:CUDA} core is waiting on data from the main memory that was
not found in cache, it will simply pause execution of that thread and execute another thread. On
\acrshortpl{acr:GPU}, the smallest and fastest cache, L1 cache, is shared within a
\acrshort{acr:SM}. It is thus fast to access shared data, as long as conflicts are avoided.

Finally, \acrshortpl{acr:CPU} also reduce latency by using much more potent control flow units.
Firstly, they have one control flow unit per core, where \acrshortpl{acr:GPU} have one control flow
unit per row of cores. This limits how many instructions can be dispatched to the cores making up a
\acrshort{acr:SM}. The cores will therefore execute the same instruction at the same time in groups
of 32, called warps. This makes branching much more expensive if it happens within a warp. If a part
of a program has two branches, A and B, the cores executing branch A will go first, followed by the
cores executing branch B. These have to be executed sequentially because the control flow unit can
only dispatch one instruction per warp. This multiplies the computation time by the number of taken
branches. \Acrshort{acr:CPU} cores only execute a single branch, or can even execute both branches
at once while waiting for the result of the conditional, keeping only the correct result once the
conditional has been evaluated. The more powerful control flow units of \acrshortpl{acr:CPU} may
also perform branch prediction, consisting of the \acrshort{acr:CPU} guessing the most likely branch
based on the result of previous computations and starting to execute this branch while waiting for
the conditional. All this is performed as an effort to reduce latency as much as possible. Programs
running on \acrshortpl{acr:GPU} must compensate by avoiding divergence as much as possible within
warps.

\subsection{Programming model}\label{subsection:graphics_processing_units:architecture:programming_model}

This work uses the \acrshort{acr:CUDA} programming model. It is a programming language, framework
and runtime developed to enable programming on \acrshortpl{acr:GPU} with an extension of the C++
language. Programs using the language execute on the \acrshort{acr:CPU} like a normal program, but
can schedule parts of the program, called kernels, to be executed on the \acrshort{acr:GPU}. Kernels
are run in parallel on the \acrshort{acr:GPU}, asynchronously from the \acrshort{acr:CPU}. The
\acrshort{acr:CPU} is therefore free to do computations of its own while the \acrshort{acr:GPU} is
executing, including adding more kernels or transfers to the \acrshort{acr:GPU} execution queue.
Multiple such queues, called streams, can exist. The purpose of using multiple streams is to execute
independent computations on the \acrshort{acr:GPU} concurrently, and maximise \acrshort{acr:GPU}
usage in case a stream is waiting. \Acrshortpl{acr:GPU} can concurrently execute kernels, transfer
data from the \acrshort{acr:CPU} to the \acrshort{acr:GPU}, and transfer data from the
\acrshort{acr:GPU} to the \acrshort{acr:CPU}. These transfers are necessary because
\acrshort{acr:CPU} and \acrshort{acr:GPU} main \acrlong{acr:RAM} are separate. This means that data
needed for computations on the \acrshort{acr:GPU} that cannot be generated on it must be explicitly
transferred from the \acrshort{acr:CPU}, and results living on the \acrshort{acr:GPU} must be
transferred back to the \acrshort{acr:CPU} in order to be displayed or written to disk. As
\acrshortpl{acr:GPU} are also generally running the displays of non-server computers, results that
are only meant to be viewed can be directly displayed and such transfers can be skipped. This is not
the case for this work. 

\begin{figure}[H]
	\centering
	\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth]{Chapter_graphics_processing_units/media/grid-of-thread-blocks}
	\caption{\Acrshort{acr:GPU} programming model~\cite{Nvidia2021}: Execution is split into multiple parallelism levels}\label{fig:gpu_programming_model}
\end{figure}

The programing model ties in with the hardware model from
Subsection~\ref{subsection:graphics_processing_units:architecture:hardware_model} by decomposing the
execution of kernels to multiple parallel levels. A kernel will be executed in parallel, with each
core executing the same function. Figure~\ref{fig:gpu_programming_model} shows how the programming
model decomposes a problem. The whole problem to be solved is represented as a multidimensional grid
of tasks, with two dimensions in this example. The kernel will execute until the whole grid has been
computed. The grid is broken up into blocks of threads. The different blocks will be dispatched to
the \acrlongpl{acr:SM} of the \acrshort{acr:GPU}, and each thread of that block will be executed on
a \acrshort{acr:CUDA} core of the \acrshort{acr:SM}. A \acrshort{acr:SM} can execute multiple blocks
at the same time if there are more cores within the \acrshort{acr:SM} than threads within a block.
Blocks need to be completely independent of each other, as they cannot be synchronised and may
execute in any order. They also cannot share local memory, as each \acrshort{acr:SM} has its own L1
cache. Threads within the same block can depend on one another, as they are executed concurrently on
the same \acrshort{acr:SM}. Threads from a block execute the same instruction at the same time in
groups of 32, or warps. This is the \textit{\acrfull{acr:SIMT}} architecture. If there are more
threads within a block than cores within a \acrshort{acr:SM}, warps will be run sequentially until
all threads are done with the instruction. Threads within a block can share local memory, and
synchronise with each other. This is useful for algorithms with steps like reductions, where threads
will wait until all threads have computed one level of the reduction, to use the result of that
level for the next one.

Typical execution of a program that adds an array A to an array B and stores the result in an array
C will proceed as follows. The \acrshort{acr:CPU} side of the program will create two arrays of data
in its memory, and initialise them as needed. It will then create two arrays of the same size on the
\acrshort{acr:GPU} using the \acrshort{acr:CUDA} runtime, and transfer the data from the
\acrshort{acr:CPU} arrays A and B to the \acrshort{acr:GPU} arrays. It will then create a result
array C on the \acrshort{acr:GPU}, and one on the \acrshort{acr:CPU}. It will then launch a kernel
on the \acrshort{acr:GPU}, with pointers to the \acrshort{acr:GPU} A and B arrays, and the
\acrshort{acr:GPU} C array. The number of elements in the vectors will dictate the size of the
execution grid. The number of elements will be split in blocks of threads of fixed size, for example
blocks of 128 threads. The number and size of blocks are given to the \acrshort{acr:GPU} when
calling the kernel. The \acrshort{acr:CPU} then must wait until the computation is done using a
synchronisation with the \acrshort{acr:CUDA} runtime, transfer the data from the \acrshort{acr:GPU}
C array to the \acrshort{acr:CPU} C array, and display the results. 

This model fits well with many \acrshort{acr:CFD} methods, including the \acrshort{acr:DG-SEM} used
in this work. We work on a mesh made up of elements and faces connecting them. Elements are
independent during most of the computation and their computations can be executed in parallel. The
only step from the main solver loop needing extra care is the computation of the fluxes between the
elements. The flux computation uses the data from the elements on either side of a face, computes a
flux and stores that flux back in both elements so they can compute their derivative. Since there
can be multiple faces on each side of an element as detailed in
Section~\ref{section:adaptive_mesh_refinement:mortar_element_method}, and each element has multiple
sides, multiple threads will attempt to read and write to the same locations at the same time. This
is a race condition, where the result of the computation will be dependent on the order in which the
threads will try to access the memory location. The results may also be wrong. If two threads read a
value, add their contribution, and store the value, only whichever thread wrote its result last will
have its contribution accounted for in the final result. Different approaches are possible to solve
this issue. For example, Giuliani and Krivodonova~\cite{Giuliani2019} use an edge colouring method
where the same kernel is run multiple times on different edges in order to avoid writing to the
elements at the same time. Our program parallelises this part of the computation on the faces
connecting the elements instead, as described in
Section~\ref{section:spectral_element_method:implementation}. As long as there are enough elements
in the mesh to saturate the cores of the \acrshort{acr:GPU} with work, this part of the program
should be efficient to run on the \acrshort{acr:GPU}.

The \acrlong{acr:AMR} and dynamic load balancing algorithms shown in
Chapters~\ref{chapter:adaptive_mesh_refinement} and~\ref{chapter:load_balancing} are not so easily
parallelisable. These algorithms are sequential in nature, with many operations needing the result
of previous ones to complete their calculations. In order to parallelise them, a few support
structures have to be added for the different processing threads to be able to find the data they
have been assigned, and the different memory locations they are allowed to access. Another issue is
that a kernel operating on certain objects, elements for example, should not modify other objects,
such as faces. This is done to avoid race conditions when multiple threads try to access the same
memory location, faces in this example. The practical consequence of this is that objects moving to
a new index in their storage arrays cannot update their neighbour faces to point to their new index.
Their neighbours must therefore have the required information to compute where the element will move
when the face moves itself, and update the index itself. By designing the algorithms this way, a
kernel running on an object type will have each thread writing to only a single object corresponding
to its index, avoiding race conditions. More information on how the algorithms are designed is
available in
Sections~\ref{section:spectral_element_method:implementation},~\ref{section:adaptive_mesh_refinement:implementation}
and~\ref{section:load_balancing:implementation}.

The meshes generated by \acrlong{acr:AMR} and dynamic load balancing are also not naturally suited
for \acrshortpl{acr:GPU}. These processors are more suited for static repetitive tasks. Element
splitting, changing their polynomial order and moving elements around will reduce the efficiency of
the computations if care is not taken to tune the algorithms to this platform. Different polynomial
orders elements in a thread warp will introduce branching, and the warp will take as much time to
execute as the highest polynomial order elements. Moving and splitting elements will put more
pressure on the limited cache of \acrshortpl{acr:GPU}, as threads will loop on different elements
after refinement and load balancing. The interval between each refinement and load balancing will
have to be tuned to trade off between having an optimal mesh for computations and having a static
mesh for more iterations.

\section{Process Parallelism}\label{section:graphics_processing_units:process_parallelism}

When trying to solve very large problems, a single node with a single \acrshort{acr:GPU} will have
insufficient processing power and memory to solve the problem in a reasonable time, or at all. To
work with these larger problems, the work needs to be split at another level than \acrshort{acr:GPU}
parallelism.  

The program can use multi-block meshes, with each block being worked on by one process and one
\acrshort{acr:GPU}. If there are fewer \acrshortpl{acr:GPU} available on a system than there are
processes, some processes will share a single \acrshort{acr:GPU} by using asynchronous execution
streams. The different processes communicate together using \textit{\acrfull{acr:MPI}} at their
boundaries. Since the solution data resides on the \acrshort{acr:GPU}, it must first be copied to
the main \acrshort{acr:CPU} memory before it is sent through the \acrshort{acr:MPI} runtime. It then
needs to be copied to the receiving process' \acrshort{acr:GPU}. This exchange necessitates multiple
transfers on different levels and should be optimised as much as possible. An approach to minimise
the number of interfaces between the different mesh blocks is explained in
Chapter~\ref{chapter:load_balancing}. 

It is possible to split the mesh into more blocks than there are \acrshortpl{acr:GPU} in a system.
In this case, there will be one process per block, and some processes will share
\acrshortpl{acr:GPU}. The \acrshortpl{acr:GPU} will be split into virtual partitions, using
concurrent execution streams. These streams execute concurrently on a \acrshort{acr:GPU}, leveraging
the fact that some operations can happen at the same time, up to one running kernel, one transfer
from the \acrshort{acr:CPU} to the \acrshort{acr:GPU}, and one transfer from the \acrshort{acr:GPU}
to the \acrshort{acr:CPU}. Additionally, the \acrshort{acr:GPU} can execute one kernel while another
kernel is waiting for memory. These partitions do not increase performance, but are useful to test
running more blocks than there are available \acrshortpl{acr:GPU}, or running the program with a
mesh that is split into more blocks than available \acrshortpl{acr:GPU} without re-splitting it.

A simple mesh generator program and a mesh partitioner are available as part of this work. The mesh
generator can create square meshes of arbitrary resolution with different boundary conditions. The
mesh partitioner can split arbitrary single block meshes to multi-block meshes.

These tasks, each consisting of a mesh block, do not necessarily need to run on
\acrshortpl{acr:GPU}. A \acrshort{acr:CPU} version of the program is provided to compare the
efficiency of the program and to aid debugging. That version uses \acrshort{acr:CPU} workers doing
the same computations. The program could even be modified to dispatch work to \acrshort{acr:CPU} and
\acrshort{acr:GPU} workers to use the full computing power of a system. Some work would need to be
done to ascertain the relative capacity of the different workers, as a \acrshort{acr:GPU} worker
running on a complete \acrshort{acr:GPU} is much faster than a \acrshort{acr:CPU} worker running on
a single \acrshort{acr:CPU} core. \Acrshort{acr:CPU} workers could also use multiple threads, with
an architecture similar to the \acrshort{acr:GPU} one.

\section{Data Structure}\label{section:graphics_processing_units:data_structure}

The data structure used in this work has been designed to provide good performance on the
\acrshort{acr:GPU} architecture, while keeping the ease of use and programming of \acrshort{acr:CPU}
code. The mesh is unstructured, made up of elements, faces and nodes.
Figure~\ref{fig:mesh_structure} shows the different components of a two block mesh.

\begin{figure}[H]
	\centering
	\subfloat[First mesh block]
	{\includesvg[height=0.55\textwidth]{Chapter_graphics_processing_units/media/mesh_0_after0_P2_MOD}\label{fig:mesh_left}}
	\hfill
	\subfloat[Second mesh block]
	{\includesvg[height=0.55\textwidth]{Chapter_graphics_processing_units/media/mesh_1_after0_P2}\label{fig:mesh_right}}
	\caption{Data structure: A mesh split into two blocks (a) First block (b) Second block}\label{fig:mesh_structure}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Performance}\label{subsection:graphics_processing_units:data_structure:performance}

In order to get good performance and fit naturally with the \acrshort{acr:GPU} architecture, the
different objects are stored as flat one-dimensional arrays on the \acrshort{acr:GPU}. The
\acrshort{acr:CUDA} memory allocation functions are run on the \acrshort{acr:CPU} and return a
continuous block of memory on the \acrshort{acr:GPU}, and the memory transfers between the
\acrshort{acr:CPU} and \acrshort{acr:GPU} copy continuous blocks of memory. This matches well with
having flat arrays of objects. Other data structures, like trees, would need multiple memory
allocations from the \acrshort{acr:CPU} and a kernel to assemble them in some kind of structure.
This would be manageable for a non-adaptive solver as it would be performed once, but with mesh
refinement and load balancing the mesh changes constantly. With arrays, an array of the new size is
allocated and the objects are moved to it. Thanks to the structure from
Subsection~\ref{subsection:graphics_processing_units:data_structure:ease_of_programming}, the
elements themselves have a known constant size regardless of polynomial order, and have the bulk of
their size out of the element object, making them fast to move and making the element array smaller.
The flat arrays also reduce indirection and structure the memory accesses. Memory indirection occurs
when data is not accessed directly, but multiple data structures must be accessed sequentially to
find the address of where the data is stored. Threads from a kernel executing on elements directly
access the element at their thread index in the element array.

This greatly simplifies transfers between the \acrshort{acr:CPU} and \acrshort{acr:GPU}, and mesh
reallocation when refining or load balancing. On the other hand, it carries less context on the
relation between mesh blocks, complicating the element exchanges from the load balancing process of
Chapter~\ref{chapter:load_balancing}. It also means that elements and faces move around in the
arrays as more are added, and their indices must be updated in other objects linking to them. 

Some data needs to be transferred to the \acrshort{acr:CPU} during the computation, such as fluxes
between mesh blocks in different processes, and data to be written to the output files. These
transfers use arrays allocated on the \acrshort{acr:CPU} and \acrshort{acr:GPU}, and a kernel
storing the data into the \acrshort{acr:GPU} array. The array can then be transferred to the
\acrshort{acr:CPU}, and either written to disk or sent to another \acrshort{acr:CPU} and then its
\acrshort{acr:GPU}.

\subsection{Ease of use}\label{subsection:graphics_processing_units:data_structure:ease_of_use}

In order to increase ease of use, the program is made to work with unstructured meshes. Unstructured
meshes allow for increased flexibility when meshing, and an unstructured mesh solver can easily be
made to also read structured meshes. In unstructured meshes, elements are not necessarily numbered
in any order. Elements hold an explicit list of the indices of their neighbours. In structured
meshes, elements are placed in a regular grid, and have an index describing their location. In 2D,
this is the row and column of the element. The neighbours of an element are found by simply
incrementing or decrementing the index. Figure~\ref{fig:mesh_types} shows a comparison of the two
types of meshes used to represent the same geometry. 

\begin{figure}[H]
	\centering
	\subfloat[Structured mesh]
	{\includegraphics[width=0.458\textwidth]{Chapter_graphics_processing_units/media/structured_mesh}\label{fig:structured_mesh}}
	\hfill
	\subfloat[Unstructured mesh]
	{\includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{Chapter_graphics_processing_units/media/unstructured_mesh}\label{fig:unstructured_mesh}}
	\caption{Types of meshes~\cite{Clucas1999}: (a) Structured (b) Unstructured}\label{fig:mesh_types}
\end{figure}

Here a concession has been made for flexibility, as structured meshes would be faster than
unstructured meshes on a \acrshort{acr:GPU}. Threads on a \acrshort{acr:GPU} benefit from accessing
memory in an ordered fashion. With a structured mesh, thread warps need only one memory access to
obtain all their neighbours. As shown in Figure~\ref{fig:structured_memory}, the neighbours are
packed in memory, and their index can be computed easily by incrementing the element indices. For
unstructured meshes, neighbour indices have to be fetched from an area in memory, and the neighbours
are not guaranteed to be contiguous in memory. This adds an indirection, and may need multiple
memory accesses. Figure~\ref{fig:unstructured_memory} shows the relation between elements from an
unstructured mesh and their neighbours. Since unstructured meshes enable more complex meshes to be
represented than strictly regular quadrilaterals, this tradeoff is accepted, and acts as a worst
case scenario for the performance of \acrshortpl{acr:GPU}.

\begin{figure}[H]
	\centering
	\subfloat[Structured mesh]
	{\includesvg[height=0.32\textwidth]{Chapter_graphics_processing_units/media/structured_memory}\label{fig:structured_memory}}
	\hfill
	\subfloat[Unstructured mesh]
	{\includesvg[height=0.32\textwidth]{Chapter_graphics_processing_units/media/unstructured_memory}\label{fig:unstructured_memory}}
	\caption{Memory accesses: (a) Structured (b) Unstructured}\label{fig:mesh_memory}
\end{figure}

The program uses the \textit{\acrfull{acr:CGNS}} mesh format. Both the provided mesh generator and
mesh partitioner output the format, and the mesh partitioner and solver can read the format. The
format is widely used, which should enable this program to read the many meshes already available
using the format.

The program outputs data using the \textit{\acrfull{acr:VTK}} format. Once again, this is a widely
used format, notably used by the \textit{ParaView} visualisation application. The results of the
program should then be easy to manipulate and display.

\subsection{Ease of programming}\label{subsection:graphics_processing_units:data_structure:ease_of_programming}

The program is written partly using the object-oriented paradigm, especially for the data structure
part. Elements, faces and nodes are objects, each with multiple data members and methods. This
groups many parameters together that would be separate arrays otherwise, making it easier to program
and keep track of the different members of objects. This has the disadvantage of putting more
pressure on the limited cache of \acrshortpl{acr:GPU} and of potentially increasing the number of
memory accesses needed. This is the structure of arrays against array of structures debate. It
increases cache pressure when a loop only accesses a subset of the data members of an object. For
example, the solution update function only uses the solution and derivative of an element. When
threads loop over those elements, they have to load entire elements into cache. If the solution and
derivative were stored into separate arrays, many more elements could fit in cache as only their
solution and derivative would be fetched. This would also improve memory accesses, as warps of
threads would need fewer memory accesses since the data is continuous.

On the other hand, using objects simplifies many parts of the code. Elements can be sent and
received from process to process as a whole: adding a data member doesn't necessitate modifying
every part of the code that copies or creates elements. This is especially useful as we can use
constructors and destructors for objects.

\begin{figure}[H]
	\centering
	\includesvg[width=0.6\textwidth]{Chapter_graphics_processing_units/media/moving_elements}
	\caption{Moving elements: The data stored in dynamic memory does not need to be copied}\label{fig:moving_elements}
\end{figure}

Constructors and destructors are used here because the objects use dynamic memory for their solution
data. As elements and faces can have a different polynomial order, they need to store more or less
data depending on the polynomial order. This makes it impossible to create an array of objects,
unless all objects use the maximum size they can have, negating the memory advantage of lower-order
elements. Instead, in this work objects use dynamic memory to hold their variable size arrays. They
hold pointers to that memory, making the objects themselves fixed in size. This has the added
benefit of making the objects smaller and easier to move around, as only the pointers and the
geometry data have to be moved while the bigger solution data stays in dynamic memory. 

Unlike the main arrays which are allocated from the \acrshort{acr:CPU} on the \acrshort{acr:GPU}
using the \acrshort{acr:CUDA} runtime, \acrshort{acr:GPU} dynamic memory is allocated on the
\acrshort{acr:GPU} itself. When the elements are created in a kernel, each thread will allocate
memory in parallel in the object constructor. That memory will be deallocated when the element is
deleted. Coupled with move semantics of modern C++, this allows an automatic management of that
memory on the \acrshort{acr:GPU}, similar to how we would use smart pointers or arrays in usual C++.
Dynamic memory allocation on the \acrshort{acr:GPU} is a relatively new feature, which enables
programming patterns closer to those used for \acrshort{acr:CPU} programming.

\section{Implementation}\label{section:graphics_processing_units:implementation}
% Talk about reduce operations, data transfers for boundaries

\subsection{Kernels}\label{subsection:graphics_processing_units:implementation:kernels}

\subsection{Reductions}\label{subsection:graphics_processing_units:implementation:reductions}

Reductions are operations that are difficult to make efficient and parallel on \acrshortpl{acr:GPU}.
Harris et al.~\cite{Harris2007} show a few different ways to optimise these operations. In this
work, we need to compute the minimum time step over the whole mesh at every time step. This
operation uses geometric and solution data from the elements to find each element's minimum time
step size. This data is only available on the \acrshort{acr:GPU}. 

\begin{figure}[H]
	\centering
	\includesvg[width=0.45\textwidth]{Chapter_graphics_processing_units/media/reduction}
	\caption{Reduction: A block of threads compute the minimum of data}\label{fig:reduction}
\end{figure}

An implementation must saturate the \acrshort{acr:GPU} with work as much as possible: blindly
looping one thread over the whole mesh will only use one of the approximately five thousand cores of
the \acrshort{acr:GPU}, for one thousandth of the speed. 

\subsection{MPI transfers}\label{subsection:graphics_processing_units:implementation:mpi_transfers}
